Revised mesh expansion instructions (#2959)
istio/istio.io: content/docs/setup/kubernetes/mesh-expansion/index.md

keywords: [kubernetes,vms]
---

This guide provides instructions for integrating VMs and bare metal hosts into an Istio mesh
deployed on Kubernetes.

## Prerequisites

* You have already set up Istio on Kubernetes. If you haven't done so already, you can find out how in the [Installation guide](/docs/setup/kubernetes/quick-start/).

* Mesh expansion machines must have IP connectivity to the endpoints in the mesh. This
typically requires a VPC or a VPN, as well as a container network that
provides direct (without NAT or firewall deny) routing to the endpoints. The machine
is not required to have access to the cluster IP addresses assigned by Kubernetes.

* Mesh expansion VMs must have access to a DNS server that resolves names to cluster IP addresses. Options
include exposing the Kubernetes DNS server through an internal load balancer, using a Core DNS
server, or configuring the IPs in any other DNS server accessible from the VM.

> * If you haven't already enabled mesh expansion [at install time with Helm](/docs/setup/kubernetes/helm-install/), you have installed the [Helm client](https://docs.helm.sh/using_helm/). You'll need it to enable mesh expansion for the cluster.

Author: No, that's not what I meant - either you have enabled mesh expansion at install time (so you don't need to do the step involving the Helm client because it's already enabled), or you need to have the Helm client installed as a prerequisite. There aren't any missing conjunctions.

## Installation steps

Setup consists of preparing the mesh for expansion and installing and configuring each VM.

### Preparing the Kubernetes cluster for expansion

> The first step when adding non-Kubernetes services to an Istio mesh is to configure the Istio installation itself and generate the configuration that will allow it to be used by the mesh expansion VMs. To prepare the cluster for mesh expansion, run the following commands on a machine with cluster admin privileges:

Author: So this isn't quite right - the mesh expansion machines aren't using the non-K8s services, the non-K8s services will be running on the mesh expansion machines. The mesh expansion machines are using your existing Istio installation. Have tweaked a bit.

1.  Ensure that mesh expansion is enabled for the cluster. If you did not specify `--set global.meshExpansion=true` at
    install with Helm, you can either `helm upgrade` with the new option (note that this will only work if you originally
    installed with Helm and Tiller), or you can use `helm template` to update your configuration with the option and reapply
    with `kubectl`.
    
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ cd install/kubernetes/helm/istio
    $ helm upgrade --set global.meshExpansion=true istio-system .
    $ cd -
    {{< /text >}}
    
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ cd install/kubernetes/helm/istio
    $ helm template --set global.meshExpansion=true --namespace istio-system . > istio.yaml
    $ kubectl apply -f istio.yaml
    $ cd -
    {{< /text >}}
    

>     You can either set the option on the command line, as in our examples, or add it to a `.yaml` values file and pass it to

Author: It's specifically something to consider when using Helm, though, rather than anything else in the doc (and this process requires that you use Helm even if you haven't used it for anything else). Agree it's a bit of an aside though, I'll put it in a note box.

    the command with `--values`, which is the recommended approach when managing configurations with multiple options. You
    can see some sample values files in your Istio installation's `install/kubernetes/helm/istio` directory and find out
    more about customizing Helm charts in the [Helm documentation](https://docs.helm.sh/using_helm/#using-helm).

> 2.  Find the IP address of the Istio ingress gateway, as this is how the mesh expansion machines will access [Citadel](/docs/concepts/security/) and [Pilot](/docs/concepts/traffic-management/#pilot-and-envoy).

Author: I think the future tense here is ok, it's not like we're doing something that has an immediate effect - this is how the machines will access Citadel and Pilot once you've finished doing all the other steps *and* are running some mesh services on the machines.

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ GWIP=$(kubectl get -n istio-system service istio-ingressgateway -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
    $ echo $GWIP
    35.232.112.158

    {{< /text >}}

3.  Generate a `cluster.env` configuration to deploy in the VMs. This file contains the k8s cluster IP address ranges to

>     intercept and redirect via Envoy. You specify the CIDR range when you install Kubernetes as `servicesIpv4Cidr`.

Author: I wonder is expanding this a bit like expanding IPv6, ie nobody actually ever uses the expanded version (in fact I don't think I ever knew what CIDR stood for, just that you use it for supernetting). It's definitely used in the K8s docs as just CIDR from the start. Will look at other usage....

    Replace $MY_ZONE and $MY_PROJECT in the following example commands with the appropriate values to obtain the CIDR
    after installation:

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ ISTIO_SERVICE_CIDR=$(gcloud container clusters describe $K8S_CLUSTER --zone $MY_ZONE --project $MY_PROJECT --format "value(servicesIpv4Cidr)")
    $ echo -e "ISTIO_CP_AUTH=MUTUAL_TLS\nISTIO_SERVICE_CIDR=$ISTIO_SERVICE_CIDR\n" > cluster.env

    {{< /text >}}

> 4.  Check the contents of the generated file. It should be similar to the following example:

Author: I think this is fine as is. We've just asked the user to look at the contents of a file, there isn't anything else we could feasibly be talking about - we should avoid pronoun references *where there is ambiguity*, not entirely, as otherwise it can make text quite repetitive.

    {{< text bash >}}

>     $ cat cluster.env

Author: We told them we were generating cluster.env in step 3, though.  If anything I'd explicitly state "the contents of the generated cluster.env file", removing the command because "we don't mention it's the cluster.env file" makes it *less* obvious what file we want them to look at.

    to the cluster.env file with the following command. You can change the ports later if necessary.
    
    {{< text bash >}}

    $ echo "ISTIO_INBOUND_PORTS=3306,8080" >> cluster.env

    {{< /text >}}

6.  Extract the initial keys for the service account to use on the VMs.

    {{<text bash>}}

    $ kubectl -n $SERVICE_NAMESPACE get secret istio.default  \
        -o jsonpath='{.data.root-cert\.pem}' |base64 --decode > root-cert.pem
    $ kubectl -n $SERVICE_NAMESPACE get secret istio.default  \
        -o jsonpath='{.data.key\.pem}' |base64 --decode > key.pem
    $ kubectl -n $SERVICE_NAMESPACE get secret istio.default  \
          -o jsonpath='{.data.cert-chain\.pem}' |base64 --decode > cert-chain.pem

    {{< /text >}}

### Setting up the machines

Next, on each VM you want to add to the mesh:

1.  Install the debian package with the Envoy sidecar:

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ curl -L https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-release/releases/1.0.0/deb/istio-sidecar.deb > istio-sidecar.deb
    $ dpkg -i istio-sidecar.deb

    {{< /text >}}

2.  Copy the cluster.env and *.pem files that you created in the previous section to the VM.

> 3.  Add the IP address of the Istio gateway (which we found in the previous section) to `/etc/hosts` or to the DNS server. In our example we'll use `/etc/hosts` as it is the easiest way to get things working. The following is an example of updating an `/etc/hosts` file with the Istio gateway address:

Reviewer: Line length and verb congruence. I would also encourage you to add a link to the step instead of the note. You can add an anchor like `{#gateway-IP}` on just above the step and then you can use the following suggestion:
```suggestion
3.  Add the IP address of the Istio gateway which we obtained in the [previous section](#gateway-IP) to the `/etc/hosts` file or to the DNS server. This example, uses the `/etc/hosts` file because it is the easiest way to get things working. The following example command updates the `/etc/hosts` file with the Istio gateway address:
```

Author: I'm always a bit leery of linking too much within a document, especially when you can basically see the step, but doesn't do any harm here. Done!

I'm not sure about the utility of addressing things that are obviously files (particularly etc/hosts, which if you have done any system administration at all is a very commonly used file) as "the foo file", "the bar folder", etc.

    {{< text bash>}}

    $ echo "35.232.112.158 istio-citadel istio-pilot istio-pilot.istio-system" >> /etc/hosts

    {{< /text >}}

> 4.  Install `root-cert.pem`, `key.pem` and `cert-chain.pem` under `/etc/certs`.

Reviewer: I would change Install to copy since that is also the command you use:
```suggestion
4.  Copy the `root-cert.pem`, `key.pem` and `cert-chain.pem` files to the `/etc/certs` folder.
```

Author: "Install" is a common term used for copying certificate files like .pem files on to a machine, so I think it's ok.

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo mkdir /etc/certs
    $ sudo cp {root-cert.pem,cert-chain.pem,key.pem} /etc/certs

    {{< /text >}}

> 6.  Install `cluster.env` under `/var/lib/istio/envoy`.

Reviewer: Ditto:
```suggestion
6.  Copy the `cluster.env` file to the `/var/lib/istio/envoy` folder.
```

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo cp cluster.env /var/lib/istio/envoy

    {{< /text >}}

> 5.  Transfer ownership of the files in `/etc/certs/` and `/var/lib/istio/envoy` to the Istio proxy.

Reviewer: To distinguish more clearly between what is a file and what is a folder, I suggest you add the nouns after their names:
```suggestion
5.  Transfer ownership of the files in the `/etc/certs/` and `/var/lib/istio/envoy` folders to the Istio proxy.
```

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo chown -R istio-proxy /etc/certs /var/lib/istio/envoy

    {{< /text >}}

7.  Verify the node agent works:

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo node_agent
    ....
    CSR is approved successfully. Will renew cert in 1079h59m59.84568493s

    {{< /text >}}

> 8.  Start Istio using `systemctl`.

Reviewer: To distinguish from files and folders, I recommend you identify `systemctl` as a command:
```suggestion
8.  Start Istio using the `systemctl` command.
```

Author: Why would the user think it was a file or folder?

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo systemctl start istio-auth-node-agent
    $ sudo systemctl start istio

    {{< /text >}}

After setup, the machine can access services running in the Kubernetes cluster

> or other mesh expansion machines.

Reviewer: Preposition missing?
```suggestion
or in other mesh expansion machines.
```

Author: The "in" covers both of them, though rereading it's probably better to say *on* the mesh expansion machines.

> The following example shows how to access the services running in the cluster using `/etc/hosts`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to access the services running in the cluster using the `/etc/hosts` file:
```

Author: See above.

{{< text bash >}}

> $ # On the kubeadm machine

Reviewer: I don't think that having the conditional in the code block is appropriate. I would make a list and since the actions need to be taken in a specific order, it would be a numbered list. I would write the following step before the code block.
```suggestion
1. Run the following command on the `kubeadm` machine:
```

$ kubectl -n bookinfo get svc productpage -o jsonpath='{.spec.clusterIP}'
10.55.246.247

{{< /text >}}

{{< text bash >}}

> $ # On the VM

Reviewer: Again, outside of the code block I would write instead of this line:
```suggestion
# Run the following command on each VM of the mesh expansion:
```

$ sudo echo "10.55.246.247 productpage.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local" >> /etc/hosts
$ curl productpage.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local:9080
... html content ...

{{< /text >}}

## Running services on a mesh expansion machine

> VM services are added to the mesh by configuring a

Reviewer: I would address the reader directly:
```suggestion
You can add VM services to the mesh by configuring a
```

Author: Hmm, it's less that you can add them this way and more that it's the only possible way to do so. Changing to "You add..."

> [ServiceEntry](/docs/reference/config/istio.networking.v1alpha3/#ServiceEntry). A ServiceEntry lets you manually add

Reviewer: Please note that we are using `ServiceEntry` only to reference a specific instance of a service entry or the `ServiceEntry` kind itself to avoid confusion. When talking about service entries generally, we use normal capitalization:
 ```suggestion
[service entry](/docs/reference/config/istio.networking.v1alpha3/#ServiceEntry). A service entry lets you manually add
```

Author: Though aren't we using a ServiceEntry (the configuration object) to add these VM services?

additional services to Istio's model of the mesh so that other services can find and direct traffic to them. The

> ServiceEntry contains the IP addresses, ports and labels of all VMs exposing a service.

Reviewer: You are now referencing the specific instance without any distinction. To help readers distinguish it better, I suggest:
```suggestion
The following example `ServiceEntry` configuration contains the IP addresses, ports and labels of all the VMs exposing the `vm1` service.
```
That way the readers can make connections between the text and the example code.

Author: I'm not referencing the specific instance, I'm talking about what you need to provide in the ServiceEntry in general to add a mesh expansion VM to the mesh. Have clarified a bit.

{{< text bash yaml >}}

$ kubectl -n test apply -f - << EOF
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: vm1
spec:
   hosts:
   - vm1.test.svc.cluster.local
   ports:
   - number: 80
     name: http
     protocol: HTTP
   resolution: STATIC
   endpoints:
    - address: 10.128.0.17
      ports:
        http: 8080
      labels:
        app: vm1
        version: 1
EOF

{{< /text >}}

## Troubleshooting

The following are some basic trouble shooting steps for common mesh expansion issues.

> *    When making requests from VM to the cluster, ensure you don't run the requests as `root` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*    When making requests from a VM to the cluster, ensure you don't run the requests as `root` or
```

Author: Oh that was a typo (not sure if it was from the original text or mine). Thanks for spotting!

server, or configuring the IPs in any other DNS server accessible from the VM.

* If you haven't already enabled mesh expansion [at install time with Helm](/docs/setup/kubernetes/helm-install/), you have installed the [Helm client](https://docs.helm.sh/using_helm/). You'll need it to enable mesh expansion for the cluster.

## Installation steps

Setup consists of preparing the mesh for expansion and installing and configuring each VM.

### Preparing the Kubernetes cluster for expansion

The first step when adding non-Kubernetes services to an Istio mesh is to configure the Istio installation itself and generate the configuration that will allow it to be used by the mesh expansion VMs. To prepare the cluster for mesh expansion, run the following commands on a machine with cluster admin privileges:

1.  Ensure that mesh expansion is enabled for the cluster. If you did not specify `--set global.meshExpansion=true` at
    install with Helm, you can either `helm upgrade` with the new option (note that this will only work if you originally
    installed with Helm and Tiller), or you can use `helm template` to update your configuration with the option and reapply

>     with `kubectl`. 

Reviewer: Trailing white space at the end of this text can cause the code-blocks to break.

Author: Fixed!

>         {{< text bash >}}

Reviewer: This line should have exactly 8 spaces before it but it has 9. Thus, the indentation breaks and the code block is not rendered.

Reviewer: If you want both code blocks to have syntax highlighting, the indentation on lines 39-54 has to be 4 spaces.

Author: Fixed.

keywords: [kubernetes,vms]
---

This guide provides instructions for integrating VMs and bare metal hosts into an Istio mesh
deployed on Kubernetes.

## Prerequisites

> * You have already set up Istio on Kubernetes. If you haven't done so already, you can find out how in the [Installation guide](/docs/setup/kubernetes/quick-start/).

Reviewer 2: "already" is used twice, doesn't sound great.

Author: Well spotted. :)

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo mkdir /etc/certs
    $ sudo cp {root-cert.pem,cert-chain.pem,key.pem} /etc/certs

    {{< /text >}}

6.  Install `cluster.env` under `/var/lib/istio/envoy/`.

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo cp cluster.env /var/lib/istio/envoy

    {{< /text >}}

5.  Transfer ownership of the files in `/etc/certs/` and `/var/lib/istio/envoy/` to the Istio proxy.

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo chown -R istio-proxy /etc/certs /var/lib/istio/envoy

    {{< /text >}}

7.  Verify the node agent works:

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo node_agent
    ....
    CSR is approved successfully. Will renew cert in 1079h59m59.84568493s

    {{< /text >}}

8.  Start Istio using `systemctl`.

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo systemctl start istio-auth-node-agent
    $ sudo systemctl start istio

    {{< /text >}}

After setup, the machine can access services running in the Kubernetes cluster
or on other mesh expansion machines.

The following example shows accessing a service running in the Kubernetes cluster from a mesh expansion VM using
`/etc/hosts/`, in this case using a service from the [Bookinfo example](docs/examples/bookinfo/).

> 1.  First, on the cluster admin machine get the virtual IP address (`clusterIP`) for the service:

Author: It's not strictly necessary but it reads better - "first, ..", "then...", "next...", "finally..." can all help orient users going through a long procedure that otherwise can look like a barrage of steps. I'd particularly use them in tutorials where you're providing a friendly voice hand-holding the user through the example, but I think they work here too.

    {{< text bash >}}

$ kubectl -n bookinfo get svc productpage -o jsonpath='{.spec.clusterIP}'
10.55.246.247

    {{< /text >}}

> 1.  Then on the mesh expansion machine, add the service name and address to its `etc/hosts` file. You can then connect to

Author: As above.

    the cluster service from the VM, as in the example below:

    {{< text bash >}}

$ sudo echo "10.55.246.247 productpage.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local" >> /etc/hosts
$ curl productpage.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local:9080
... html content ...

    {{< /text >}}

## Running services on a mesh expansion machine

You add VM services to the mesh by configuring a

> [`ServiceEntry`](/docs/reference/config/istio.networking.v1alpha3/#ServiceEntry). A service entry lets you manually add

Author: No, because that's really repetitive ("configuring a configuration"). You need to configure a "one of these things we're pointing you to the reference docs for", that's already perfectly clear.

additional services to Istio's model of the mesh so that other services can find and direct traffic to them. Each
`ServiceEntry` configuration contains the IP addresses, ports, and labels (where appropriate) of all VMs exposing a
particular service, as in the following example.

{{< text bash yaml >}}

$ kubectl -n test apply -f - << EOF
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: vm1
spec:
   hosts:
   - vm1.test.svc.cluster.local
   ports:
   - number: 80
     name: http
     protocol: HTTP
   resolution: STATIC
   endpoints:
    - address: 10.128.0.17
      ports:
        http: 8080
      labels:
        app: vm1
        version: 1
EOF

{{< /text >}}

## Troubleshooting

> The following are some basic trouble shooting steps for common mesh expansion issues.

Reviewer: Troubleshooting is one word:
```suggestion
The following are some basic troubleshooting steps for common mesh expansion issues.
```

*    When making requests from a VM to the cluster, ensure you don't run the requests as `root` or
    `istio-proxy` user. By default, Istio excludes both users from interception.

*    Verify the machine can reach the IP of the all workloads running in the cluster. For example:

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ kubectl get endpoints -n bookinfo productpage -o jsonpath='{.subsets[0].addresses[0].ip}'
    10.52.39.13

    {{< /text >}}

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ curl 10.52.39.13:9080
    html output

    {{< /text >}}

*    Check the status of the node agent and sidecar:

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo systemctl status istio-auth-node-agent
    $ sudo systemctl status istio

    {{< /text >}}

*    Check that the processes are running:

    {{< text bash >}}

>     $ ps aux |grep istio

Reviewer: At first glance, readers don't know where the command and output start/end.
Consider splitting them into two code blocks and signal to the reader what they should look for in the output.

Author: Actually the Istio theme does a nice job of formatting bash code blocks so you can easily see where the command is - the output (any lines that don't begin with $) has a different background colour. I can change it but I'm not sure if it's necessary given the presentation.

Reviewer 2: Correct, throughout the doc set, we encourage the command and its output to be in the same block, and we format it correctly in a consistent way.

server, or configuring the IPs in any other DNS server accessible from the VM.

* If you haven't already enabled mesh expansion [at install time with Helm](/docs/setup/kubernetes/helm-install/), you have
installed the [Helm client](https://docs.helm.sh/using_helm/). You'll need it to enable mesh expansion for the cluster.

## Installation steps

Setup consists of preparing the mesh for expansion and installing and configuring each VM.

### Preparing the Kubernetes cluster for expansion

The first step when adding non-Kubernetes services to an Istio mesh is to configure the Istio installation itself, and
generate the configuration files that let mesh expansion VMs connect to the mesh. To prepare the
cluster for mesh expansion, run the following commands on a machine with cluster admin privileges:

1.  Ensure that mesh expansion is enabled for the cluster. If you did not specify `--set global.meshExpansion=true` at
    install time with Helm, there are two options for enabling mesh expansion, depending on how you originally installed
    Istio on the cluster: 
    
    *   If you installed Istio with Helm and Tiller, run `helm upgrade` with the new option:
    

>     {{< text bash >}}

Reviewer 3: some of this document has a CR after the text bash and before the terminating md block.

There is no need for a CR between the text block and the beginning of the text.

This is an example of the work done correctly.

Author: done!

    $ cd -
    {{< /text >}}
    
    *   If you installed Istio without Helm and Tiller, use `helm template` to update your configuration with the option and
        reapply with `kubectl`:
    
    {{< text bash >}}
    $ cd install/kubernetes/helm/istio
    $ helm template --set global.meshExpansion=true --namespace istio-system . > istio.yaml
    $ kubectl apply -f istio.yaml
    $ cd -
    {{< /text >}}
    
    > When updating configuration with Helm, you can either set the option on the command line, as in our examples, or add
    it to a `.yaml` values file and pass it to
    the command with `--values`, which is the recommended approach when managing configurations with multiple options. You
    can see some sample values files in your Istio installation's `install/kubernetes/helm/istio` directory and find out
    more about customizing Helm charts in the [Helm documentation](https://docs.helm.sh/using_helm/#using-helm).

1.  Find the IP address of the Istio ingress gateway, as this is how the mesh expansion machines will access [Citadel](/docs/concepts/security/) and [Pilot](/docs/concepts/traffic-management/#pilot-and-envoy).

    {{< text bash >}}

> 

Reviewer 3: line 68/72 can be deleted.

Author: Done

    $ GWIP=$(kubectl get -n istio-system service istio-ingressgateway -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
    $ echo $GWIP
    35.232.112.158

    {{< /text >}}

1.  Generate a `cluster.env` configuration to deploy in the VMs. This file contains the Kubernetes cluster IP address ranges
    to intercept and redirect via Envoy. You specify the CIDR range when you install Kubernetes as `servicesIpv4Cidr`.
    Replace `$MY_ZONE` and `$MY_PROJECT` in the following example commands with the appropriate values to obtain the CIDR
    after installation:

    {{< text bash >}}

> 

Reviewer 3: 81/84 can be deleted.

Author: Done

    $ ISTIO_SERVICE_CIDR=$(gcloud container clusters describe $K8S_CLUSTER --zone $MY_ZONE --project $MY_PROJECT --format "value(servicesIpv4Cidr)")
    $ echo -e "ISTIO_CP_AUTH=MUTUAL_TLS\nISTIO_SERVICE_CIDR=$ISTIO_SERVICE_CIDR\n" > cluster.env

    {{< /text >}}

1.  Check the contents of the generated `cluster.env` file. It should be similar to the following example:

    {{< text bash >}}

> 

Reviewer 3: line 90/94 can be deleted.

Author: Done.

     name: http
     protocol: HTTP
   resolution: STATIC
   endpoints:
    - address: 10.128.0.17
      ports:
        http: 8080
      labels:
        app: vm1
        version: 1
EOF

{{< /text >}}

## Troubleshooting

The following are some basic troubleshooting steps for common mesh expansion issues.

*    When making requests from a VM to the cluster, ensure you don't run the requests as `root` or
    `istio-proxy` user. By default, Istio excludes both users from interception.

*    Verify the machine can reach the IP of the all workloads running in the cluster. For example:

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ kubectl get endpoints -n bookinfo productpage -o jsonpath='{.subsets[0].addresses[0].ip}'
    10.52.39.13

    {{< /text >}}

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ curl 10.52.39.13:9080
    html output

    {{< /text >}}

*    Check the status of the node agent and sidecar:

    {{< text bash >}}

    $ sudo systemctl status istio-auth-node-agent
    $ sudo systemctl status istio

    {{< /text >}}

*    Check that the processes are running. The following is an example of the processes you should see on the VM if you run
     `ps`, filtered for `istio`:

    {{< text bash >}}

>     $ ps aux |grep istio

Reviewer 3: can you change the ps command to
`ps -aux | grep istio`

thanks :)
